We're recording again.
So we were picking up where you were reporting in Washington for the Post and tracing the evolution.
Yeah, I thought that would be a perfect job for a writer.
And in fact, I think it's the worst job for a writer.
If you actually want to be doing writing while you're a reporter,
you're probably not going to.
I mean, you know, you're, as you know, a reporter's job is done when the story's done.
It's not like you've got a nine-to-five job or something.
I'd go home exhausted at night, and the last thing in the world I wanted to do was sit down and write something.
That's why I quit the newspaper.
Yeah.
It's tough.
You can't do it.
I realized that after about four or five months, but I had been such a lousy reporter anyway that they were happy to see me go, I think, and I
quite happy to leave.
I went out to San Francisco, got a job as a waiter, and that was a perfect job for me.
I was able to... What restaurant?
Oh, I worked at the Hilton.
I worked at a restaurant in the Tenderloin, Lair's, Lair's Restaurant.
I kept getting, I was not a very good waiter, so I kept getting fired, but it was always easy to get another job.
My ship was out of Alameda, so I spent a lot of time.
You did?
Yeah.
Anyway, it was good money, and I had my days free, so I'd write, and I taught high school for a little while out there as well, but mainly, you know, I really concentrated on the writing, working mainly on short stories, and I wrote it.
I finished one of the novels that I'd been working on in Oxford, and I
And then I got really interested in writing short stories.
And finally in, you know, 75, I had one that I really thought was a good story.
And I hadn't sent any of them out before because I knew they just weren't there.
But this story really felt good to me.
So I sent it out.
I was very lucky.
It was taken by The Atlantic.
And really, since then, I had good luck with getting my story.
It was called Smokers.
And...
It was in my first collection.
And I had... Which was published when?
I think they put the dates in here.
81.
Okay.
80 or 81.
80.
So it took eight years, really.
81.
Oh, yeah.
It took a long time.
A lot of false starts?
A lot of false starts.
Many rejections?
Oh, yeah.
The novel.
The novels I couldn't have any luck with.
Couldn't get arrested.
Which is good, again, because
How many novels, approximately?
Well, I wrote three novels.
I didn't see a lot of tapes running.
You know, tell me.
Okay.
Call me.
I'm not sending this in for two or three weeks.
Okay.
What kind of document in your life is right here?
Well, anyway, I guess you can say that in P.W.
Why not?
I had one of the novels taken in England.
By which publisher?
Allen and Unwin.
L-A-L-O-E-N-N-U-N-W-I-N.
What was its title?
I think we'll just leave it at that.
Why don't we just say I had a novel published in England?
That's Tobias Wolfe?
Yeah.
I mean, it's not going to be that hard to find out.
Yeah, I know.
I know.
And it's just my business.
Yeah.
It's so bad, though.
It's so bad.
I can't, you know.
Actually, you know, I think we'll just leave it.
I'll just say I wrote the office.
That's the important thing.
And it didn't do anything.
But why is it bothering you?
I don't want anybody to read it.
I mean, it's just so bad.
It's embarrassing to me.
But you sound like Tim O'Brien now.
Would you go back and read it?
No, it's not good enough to revise.
It's clearly an editor in England, but it was good enough to publish.
Yeah.
A reputable publishing house.
You know, died?
Yeah, died.
Yeah, died, absolutely.
Blessedly?
Blessedly, yeah.
Can we say that?
Uh, yeah, you can say that.
Died blessedly.
And this was by 80, 81?
No, this would have been 75.
Well, what's wrong with it?
You were a kid, for God's sake.
How old were you?
20, 20-odd?
No, I was by then 30.
30?
Well, I was published.
Well, anyway, I, I... You're nervous.
Yeah, I don't like it.
It's embarrassing to me.
Anyway, the, uh,
I mean, I wrote it in my toilet.
I'll go over this with you.
Okay.
All right.
Yeah, go over it.
I promise you that I'll call and we'll go over it.
But anyway, it had at least the virtue of making me feel like somebody else in the world besides me thought I was a writer.
And, you know, once you've got a book out there with your name on it,
It kind of encouraged you.
Did it have a nice dust jacket?
No, it had a hideous dust jacket.
It was a hardcover book.
Hardcover book.
Were you elated for a while?
Oh, yeah.
How long were you happy?
Well, at what point did you... I don't remember how long I was happy.
At what point did you discover that you were embarrassed by this thing?
Oh, probably three or four years later when I started rereading it.
I thought, my God, did I really think this was good?
Did you use another run for it?
No, no, no.
It was just...
Flawed to the root.
Juvenalia?
Juvenalia.
Most people's juvenalia doesn't get published.
Full bear.
But mine did.
That's a quote, by the way.
If we say it, we'll... Good.
Yeah.
Okay.
So let's continue.
But at least, I mean...
In some ways, I'm glad for it, because it did buoy me up.
I mean, it reminded me that I wasn't just a waiter, but I was a waiter who wrote books that other people might even publish.
Right.
But did it also sour you on a novel form?
No, no, no.
That you moved over to the short stories?
No, that wasn't it really.
I just got, I was, I started reading a lot of short stories.
I really got captivated by the form.
I really liked the form.
And so I started writing short stories, and I just found it very, uh,
better suited for my particular gifts at that point, anyway.
And what captivated you specifically about the form?
What really captured you?
What was it in the short story that...?
The power.
The directness.
The immediacy.
It was the same thing I liked about poetry.
the unity of impression that a short story could make on you, the ability to conjure up a world in a few pages and get something going indelibly in the reader's mind and then leave it to continue to grow afterwards.
The novel has a kind of completeness about it.
It finishes itself.
The story suggests, implies, gets something going almost at its best.
And I really liked that.
I found it exciting, and I started reading a lot of short stories.
short stories that started writing them myself, and I found, perhaps because of the life I'd led, very nomadic and very fragmentary, maybe there was something in my own experience that lent itself to an appreciation of the story, which has a very momentary nature, I think.
It doesn't... The novel implies a kind of stability, a kind of... a steady...
fund of experience, a certain place in which one stays for a while.
At the bottom of the novel, there's a sense of continuity.
And that's not true of the short stories.
The short stories are very immediate, very direct, kind of breaks on you, and it's gone.
Maybe about a single night.
Of course, Ulysses is almost about a single night.
You could say that about a novel as well.
Generally speaking, I think it's truer of the story than the novel.
And I don't know what it is.
It just really took me by storm.
And for years, I wrote nothing but short stories.
And, you know, they didn't come easy.
I've always had to work very hard and rewrite a lot at everything I do.
But I felt very much more in control of what I was doing.
I felt a kind of authority in my use of the form that I had.
had never quite felt with the novel.
I'd always felt a little kind of bled by the form rather than leading it.
With the story, I felt more, you know, like I was at home.
You mentioned in this vintage book on the short stories, the anthology that you edited, you said that you had the perfect stranger in mind when you compiled it.
And I'm just wondering if you had the perfect stranger in mind when you were writing the memoirs.
trying to bring up both the stories and the memoirs.
Yeah.
It's a philosophic question, I guess, on the audience.
The question of audience is always a tricky one.
I suppose in the end, no matter what they say, writers write for a reader like themselves because
Who else could you imagine writing for?
I mean, I say stranger, but at the same time, I suppose there's also... You say stranger in compiling the anthology, though.
Well, what I said was, yeah, in compiling the anthology.
But who is that stranger?
In a way, I'm imagining a stranger like myself, with my tastes.
I mean, how could I say, well...
This person who's a stranger to me must have such and such a taste, and this is the... So these are the stories I'm going to give him.
That's absurd.
Whenever we do... I mean, I do say that.
I admit I said that.
But at the same time, there's no question at all that I'm projecting my taste onto that stranger, you know.
And so, in the end, the question comes back around.
I'm hoping that readers will enjoy the things I enjoy.
Can I tell you a cute story?
I did an interview two weeks ago with Alexander Theroux on his book, The Primary Colors, which is delightful.
We have the same editor at home.
And so, I don't know how we got on to this, but Alex quoted Nabokov, who was once asked who he writes for, and he said, when I write, I look out and I see the faces of 100 Nabokov's faces.
Wonderful.
Because I see the face of the 100 little, the poker house.
There you go.
Exactly.
And I guess that's precisely what you're saying.
It also means, I mean, this isn't just solipsism.
It is also a way of being, of holding yourself responsible.
That is, I don't ever condescend to my readers because I think I wouldn't be fooled by that.
You know?
So in a sense, my own, you know, I imagine a reader when I'm writing or collecting an anthology, putting an anthology together who is as sophisticated as I am, who asks as much, who has as critical intelligence as mine, because anything else would be condescension.
You know, if I say, well, I wouldn't really, this wouldn't pass muster with me, but
Most people won't notice, you know.
Well, that's how you write badly, by doing that.
You have to hold yourself to the highest standard.
And how can you imagine a standard higher than the standards that you hold for yourself, you know?
When I read another novelist, I hold them to a high standard.
And it would be insanity of me to hold myself to a lesser standard, because then
The very people that I would like to have like my work won't like it.
So the question of who you write for inevitably comes back to yourself.
Do you have vital signs?
I know that by writing for newspapers, at least you technically... I love this introduction, by the way, to the writing.
Oh, good.
I mean, I'll use it.
I can see it in any number of...
other instances down the road.
A good buddy of mine is a writer, but also a musician.
And he said, writing is so much harder.
He said, when you get up and you do a jazz thing on the stage, he said that the response is instantaneous.
I mean, if you're connecting with the audience, you get your gratification immediately.
Yeah, it's true.
But writing is, you do this thing for years.
Yeah.
I mean, and you do with the knowledge that this thing is not going to be done for a long time.
You know, hopefully you'll live long enough to see the thing.
Exactly.
But you can't be sure you won't.
And I guess you can't.
You know, my concern is I just want this book out.
You know, will I get the footnotes done in time?
Will I get all the corrections in?
You know, that kind of stuff.
I don't know if that's a question of anything, but where was I going with that?
I guess I'm really interested in your own perception of your development as a writer.
I mean, you discussed the novel that now embarrasses you to discuss.
I'm certain that you wouldn't feel that way about this boy's life.
No, I don't.
I don't.
In fact, I don't feel that way.
And that was by example, you know, of anything that you've written.
The stuff that I've published since.
I mean, that's important.
I've been very, I've been, you know.
Because you made a comment earlier about completed work, being completed work, and representing what you did at that time in your life.
Right.
So maybe you can bring these things together here at this point, and then also related to how you're developing and what you see coming, you know.
No, I see the work beginning with that first published story.
as being mature work and work that i'm happy to take responsibility for and claim credit for even uh since then and you know it's not all perfect i can see things that or it doesn't seem perfect to me now though it seemed as perfect as i could make it at the time i let it go i can see things that uh now that uh i might wish i had done differently but but
Maybe everything else would have been done differently if I had done that at the time.
So, you know, it's like, you know, it's the old business of upgrading your stereo, you know.
Once you buy the new speakers, then you have to buy the new amp because you need more watts per channel.
You know what I mean?
And the thing belongs on its, it has its own little world that it inhabits.
It has its own,
terms on which it's successful and you start monkeying with those terms you throw everything else out of whack i think uh where do i see uh it's going i have a collection of stories that i've been working on over the last oh god six or seven years that is uh actually very close to completion that will probably come out in about a year or a year and a half i my last book came out about six years ago this boy's life
and uh that was the last that was the last book prior to this one yeah so your published fiction really has been just short stories here and there since then i published nothing out of in pharaoh's army because they didn't want to send out parts of it uh until it was done and then i have just you know i have like three pieces coming out in different places uh this is short fiction
No, this is three pieces from this.
Yeah, Esquire's going to publish a piece, and the Three Penny Review published a piece, and Esquire in England is publishing a piece.
Did you make the selections, or did they make the selections?
They made the selections.
That was fine, but I wanted to wait until I got the book all done, because I had, unlike a collection of short stories, but you send out the story as you finish it,
the parts of this book were so interdependent that i had to make sure that it was really as i did a lot of rewriting on this book a lot of rewriting and literary work well i certainly intended it that way and i worked very hard on it and and i wanted to uh make sure you do see it as a literary work oh yes oh yeah absolutely i wouldn't have taken so much time with it otherwise um
That's my satisfaction in the whole process is to think that I have made a literary work finally.
It's more than the telling of the events.
Yeah, I have to have a certain... In this boy's life.
Yeah, when they're told, they're told.
But what remains is a sense of, what can I say, aesthetic pride.
So even though you haven't published fiction between hardcovers in how long now?
ten years nine years does this disturb you at all no not at all yeah i've published a lot of fiction since then magazines and journals uh i've made a lot of stories and uh several of those stories have been in best american short stories and whatnot and i've certainly kept alive as a fiction writer and as i say i'm very close to finishing this collection of stories
one or two stories short of a collection.
Is there a cohesiveness on a collection?
Should there be, in your view?
Yeah, I do.
I think that the readers of this collection will find a coherence to it.
Thematically?
Thematically, and the tone, the feeling, the atmosphere of the stories.
I would hope that the reader would recognize my work from one story to the next and feel a certain
quality of moral attention on particularly the domestic life in these stories.
You know, a quote, and again, it's a wonderful quote, family life has always been great theater and always will be, like war.
I mean, that's from theater, but I couldn't lie certainly to just about everything.
Yeah, it does.
You bet.
And if there is a continuity in what you've written, would you say that it is the family life, the domestic?
Yes.
The areas that
Yeah, that's the battleground on which most of us fight our wars, I think, and have our victories and our losses.
Are there mysteries to you that you try to solve, or is the storytelling?
There are mysteries that I try to delineate.
There are mysteries that I try to recognize.
I am incapable of solving them.
Don't try.
I'm very much of the Chekhovian school there, which, you know, when Suverin was badgering him about, you know, tying up his stories a little more deeply, and he said that wonderful quote about it is that it is not the responsibility of the writer to answer questions only to pose them, and I think that's
I think that's true.
Do you see everything that you're doing as part of a corpus that they all fit together?
Well, what I hope is that readers one day will look back and see them as all part of a whole.
But I can't see them that way myself.
I think that it would be
I'm not writing a series of novels about Yachna-Patofa County, right?
I mean, there's not... It doesn't have that coherence.
But I think there are elements in the fiction and in Dispoised Life that will be seen, perhaps, I hope, as characteristic of my work and definitive of my work.
And as time goes on,
You know, those elements will probably become more pronounced, I hope more elaborate.
You know, I hope it will grow like a tree, really.
Where you did leave such a peripatetic life, is place, as a consequence, important to you in your writing?
Yes.
Yeah, it is.
You know, everything happens somewhere.
And... But you said there's no... You have to put out for a county either, I mean... Well, no, not in that... I know the sense you're talking about.
I mean, it's more than the four corners of the yard in Aroma County, but a state of mind.
But also, I think that, you know, I'm talking specifically about setting here.
There's nothing that you feel... I mean, you have no... You're not bound to any... To any boundaries, I guess.
Not really, no.
Physical boundaries.
No, I think not.
I did have a question, and I guess I think I asked it, and maybe you answered it.
At what point did you realize that you were a writer, that you could bring the heat in, as the pictures say, I mean, that you could bring it, you know, that you could play in this ballpark?
Well, I'm just trying to think.
I mean, there are different times.
There's not any one moment for me that I can identify.
There are series of moments.
There's a moment when... You know, there's one, really, and it's a very odd one.
This is before any contact with my brother or that teacher in school or any kind of success as a writer at all.
But when I was...
Still in Concrete High School, I used to write short stories for friends of mine and for people who wanted to hand them in, you know, for their, I'd write essays and stories for friends of mine.
And because I was just writing all, I wrote a lot.
And a friend of mine, who was then my age, 14 or so, just another rube like me, said to me one day, you know, you ought to be a writer.
And I asked something, but it never occurred
Isn't that odd?
I mean, I wrote and I read all the time, but the idea that I could be someone who wrote things that other people read, not just for the entertainment of my friends or for getting extra credit in school, but actually have never really occurred to me before.
And it's funny that this kid didn't know anything about what it had to be a writer.
He knew less than I did about it.
Those words took root in me somehow and gave me some kind of center around which the rest of me could coalesce and see life.
And it was then, really, that I began to start thinking of myself as someone who might be a writer.
And when that happens to you, you start seeing things differently.
Your approach to the world becomes a different approach.
The way you organize your experience becomes different than it was before.
So that boy whose name I don't even remember now, but who's, it was genius.
It doesn't matter, but you know, I had the strangest experience.
I was up in Alaska this spring.
I was giving a reading, and
This young woman came up to me after the reading and said, had a book for me to sign, and then talked.
And just as she was about to leave, she said, you know, you won't remember him, she said, that my father went to Concrete High School with you.
And I said, oh, really, what was his name?
And she told me his name, and that was the boy.
I told her that story, too.
Wow.
It was a funny moment, I mean, and all the other stuff was of infinite importance, and nothing could have happened without it, but that needed to happen first.
I mean, you said that you had a lot of rejections.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, you didn't say, well, maybe I should be doing something else.
Yeah, I did sometimes, but I couldn't.
I couldn't do anything else.
I mean, I couldn't.
I couldn't both in the sense that I didn't know how.
I mean, I could be a teacher.
I've been a teacher.
I like teaching.
I want to talk briefly about that at some point.
I like teaching, but it never would have been enough for me.
And though it's enough, it would have been a lot easier for me if it had been enough for me because trying to do both for years and years was very hard.
But I just need to write.
You know, it's funny.
When I finished this book, it took me a long time to write this book.
How long?
I started work on it a year after This Boy's Life came out, so I worked on this book.
I just finished doing the last Touch on the Galleys two days ago.
Okay?
No kidding.
So there are changes from what I've read?
Nothing significant.
I mean, they're significant to me.
I don't even know if you'd notice them.
They're word changes, mostly.
Housekeeping, I didn't.
things that just tone it up, repetitions that I caught that I didn't want.
You know what I mean?
I hate those repetitions.
Oh, I hate, I just feel so careless when something shows up again, you know?
I think I caught them all.
I hate the same word twice.
I do, too.
I don't, I mean, I, really, I just won't, if I can help it, I won't do it.
And so I caught a lot of that stuff.
And I mean, in the whole book.
Yeah, I'm talking the same way.
I'm talking the same way.
I don't write a chapter, I mean, if I,
I knowledgeably used, knowingly used, one rather peculiar word at the beginning of the book and again at the end, and I allowed myself that, because it was not a word that there was any equivalent for, and it was absolutely essential in both places, the word fetishized.
And it's a peculiar word, and I know people will notice it, but there is no other word.
I remember, but I still recall...
The first use of it?
Yeah.
Anyway, it doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter, because I usually pick these things up.
Yeah, but there were other repetitions in there that I got rid of.
Every other one that I could find, I got rid of.
Did you use a computer for that?
No, I couldn't.
You had to do a search.
I know, I know.
But the problem was that I had started off on that dinosaur at IBM, and then I went to another computer, and I didn't know how to... Anyway.
No, I didn't do that.
What was I talking about?
That's okay.
We were talking about when you discovered it.
Let me ask another question.
Any editors that you've worked with that have been a particular usefulness to you?
You know what?
I'll tell you, Nick, I don't want to do that because I always recognize the editors
In whatever way I can when I'm working for them.
But if I, first of all, if I name them all now, that will sound ridiculous.
And if I leave one of them out, they'll be so hurt.
Anyone I would leave out would be so hurt.
I couldn't do it.
There isn't any one particular additive then.
I'm not going to name any.
That you've worked with throughout your career, I think, is what you're saying.
You've worked with a variety.
Yeah.
A number of editors.
That's right.
They've all been good.
And no single one has had this overwhelming impact in development as a writer that you can think of.
How about an agent?
Is there anything peculiar?
I think I'll just, if you don't mind.
I think you did.
I think editors and agents, I think I'll just leave all that out.
Okay.
Okay?
It's not particularly significant in any way to
How about publishing houses?
Have you moved around from... Yeah, I've moved around from house to house a lot.
This will be my first book with Knopf.
I've published almost every book with a different house.
Oh, I see.
Okay.
Yeah, I started off... I'll be glad to show you the P.W.
question list at some point.
Yeah, that's all right.
It's kind of funny.
It's good, actually.
I started off with... This is stuff I'd never ask.
I just punch it up on a Harvard University computer.
Go ahead.
I'm just going to look at this thing.
I started off with the Echo Press.
They did my first two books.
And then I did a book with Houghton Mifflin, and then I did a book with the Atlantic Monthly Press.
Which one was Houghton?
It was a book, a short story is called Back in the World.
Okay.
And then This Boy's Life came out with Atlantic Monthly Press, and then Knopf is going to do my next two books.
And I've had different paperback publishers.
Oh, that's all right.
But you do have a multi-book contract with Cobb?
Yes, for this book and the next one.
Okay, and the next one is the stories.
Yeah.
Do you have a title for the stories?
No, not yet.
Are you projecting any kind of pub date on it, publishing year?
I think they're hoping that it will come out in a year.
Okay, a year from fall.
Yeah.
So my book's coming out.
I assume that the title will come from one of the stories, and so it's just a question of... Well, not necessarily.
My last book did not have a title that came from one of the stories.
And why was that?
Because there was no one story that I wanted to use to dominate, to direct the reader's attention that much.
So I actually took a line out of one of the stories that seemed to me to cover that.
cover the collection pretty well.
But it goes back to the question of unity among the stories, then.
And I guess that apparently by choosing a neutral title, so to speak, you did in your own mind feel that there was... I was kind of democratizing the attention that the reader would put on the collection.
And I might do that again.
I'm not sure.
I haven't absolutely decided yet what I'm going to do with this in the way of the title.
Can you just tell me
Briefly, I mean, I've got the first memoir.
I'm sure that stuff is in there.
I haven't had a chance to go over and prepare for this interview today, but they want biographical stuff, a place of birth, and I'm sure that's in the end of the book.
Well, I was born in Birmingham, Alabama, 1945.
Lived in, lived all over the country.
You gave me the DOB on that just for?
My, my birthday.
Yeah, yeah.
June 19th, 1945.
You don't mind these questions?
No, I don't mind these questions.
This is the most innocent kind of question.
But it's actually kind of stupid asking them.
Anyway, yeah.
And lived all over the country, mostly in the Midwest.
Got all that.
Yeah, okay.
If there's anything that you think I'm not covering and you feel that I should be, you know, please...
Let's do talk about teaching.
Is this something you do largely to support the family, or is it something that you get?
I don't do that much of it anymore.
Tell me what you teach, too, by the way.
I teach literature and creative writing, a workshop in creative writing.
I usually teach one class in each year.
Right now, I just teach in the fall every year.
So you're getting ready to start.
I am starting, yep, I've already started.
And I'm teaching the graduate program here at Syracuse University.
And I like it.
I love talking about books, especially with other passionate readers.
And it's once a week for three hours, extremely intense conversations about books.
a chance to share.
After all, that's what I've been doing for the last 25 years, is studying and thinking about books.
And it gives me a chance to share what I've learned, share what I think, share what I love.
I get a lot back as well.
It's nice to see the young writers I work with go on and have lives of their own as writers, which has happened a lot here.
I've enjoyed teaching here.
I've had plenty of chances to leave, and I haven't.
I'm still here.
And I know John Brock says he can't teach writing, so he calls himself a coach.
Yeah, yeah, he's right.
Of course, he's absolutely right.
He's absolutely right.
I will say this, though, that I think that
I don't think I'm being arrogant to say that a lot of the writers that I've worked with are better writers for having worked with me.
And I couldn't teach them to write, but I think I'm pretty good at making them aware of what they're doing and giving them their four chances of making what they're doing better.
I'm a good reader, and I think that's what most young writers need, is a good, honest reader.
Writing doesn't happen in a vacuum.
It doesn't happen alone.
It's from the earliest times.
Writers would share their, you know, in earliest times, that is in our kind of recorded forms of literature, the novel, the short story and whatnot, poetry.
Writers would share their manuscripts with each other.
And, you know, Eliot's effect on Yeats, or Pound's effect on both Yeats and Eliot is well documented, for example.
Well, he didn't teach Eliot how to write.
He didn't teach Yeats how to write.
But he had a very positive influence on their writing, just as other writers have had a positive influence on my writing.
Ray Carver and I used to share manuscripts, and I learned a lot from working with him, and I think he may even have learned a thing or two from my readings of his work.
Have you read Elizabeth Bishop's letters?
No, I haven't.
I hear they're terrific.
I interviewed Robert Giroux.
kind of interviews I'd like to do.
And there was one reviewer, was it, it couldn't have been, it was the Boston Globe, which was a sacrilege.
I mean, it's Gil Caldwell, she was a machine or something.
I don't know if that's a question or anything like that, but really, you should read those letters, Gil.
Where she is talking with Robert Lowell and all these other writers,
I mean, she's not making Lowell a better poet by any means.
Now, is he making her a better poet by any means?
And I don't even know if there's a kind of a synergy going on here, but you certainly are meeting on common ground.
To me, absolutely.
You're meeting on common ground, and you are the very active writing.
is, as you said earlier, you know, so solitary.
It can take so long.
It takes me usually about three months even to get a short story where I really, really like it.
That's a long time.
I know Joyce Carols can write good stories in a much shorter time.
Are you underage of that, by the way?
Somewhat, but not very.
I mean, basically... That's a teasing question.
It is.
I'll tell you what.
I think that one of the things that I've had to learn is that
is I've had to learn how I work.
And I've had to learn that I don't work like other people work.
I work like I work.
And once I realized, once I've learned my own rhythms, that I don't get discouraged when things take longer than I want them to, you know, or I thought they would, I understand.
I work every day.
I'm not lazy or anything, but I just have my own pace and routine.
Yeah.
Kind of a routine.
Morning and afternoon.
I write, you know, I try to write.
When I'm working, I write about six hours a day.
I try to spend about six hours a day writing.
But I just, you know, my progress tends to be rather glacial, and as I say, I rewrite a lot.
Looks a good day for you.
How much, you mean, in the way I have words done?
Do you measure it, I guess?
No, I don't.
I hold myself to time, not to length.
Because if I hold myself to length, I just
I'd feel funny about that because the main thing is that I'd just be writing as well as I can during the time I don't work.
And that's the important thing.
Some days I'll write a lot more than other days.
What's important is to give it your best shot every day.
Give it my best shot every day, exactly.
And I don't hold myself to a quote of words every day.
I'm not like Trollope.
I can't do that.
I just can't do it.
Do you write on the computer first, tattoo, or do you?
Yeah, yeah, I do.
You didn't use that.
Gradually kind of transferred my whole, it's a way of thinking, really, after all.
I love the computer.
I do, too.
I started off very resistant.
I wouldn't even use a typewriter to compose on, and when I learned to compose on a typewriter, I could never go back to writing my stuff out first, and now I have moved from the typewriter to the computer, but it took me years to do it.
I mean, but now...
My mind works that way, and it's a great instrument, obviously, especially for somebody who is as compulsive a rewriter as I am.
I mean, it just makes all the difference in the world for me as a writer.
Well, just the fact that you can revise up until the day the thing goes up.
Exactly.
Yeah, the press, you know.
And they say, actually, it's made for longer books, especially non-fiction books.
I mean, the fact that you can just, without worrying about the pagination or anything like that, you can just go in.
It's wonderful.
Do you start each day by reading what you've done the previous day?
Yeah, I do.
I go over what I did the previous day.
And you say, this is shit I got ahead.
A lot of times.
But then you don't have papers, so there really are no variants out there.
That's right.
Does that bother you at all?
Not at that.
I tend to, I don't keep rough drafts, anyone.
I never did.
I don't ever want anybody to know.
how badly I write when I'm getting to, while I'm in the process of writing.
It would just embarrass me no end to have anybody see what I've been, you know, what the interim stages of my work look like.
I'm almost neurotic about it.
I have very, I leave no footprints.
All that's going to be there at the end is the book.
That's what it begins.
You see, in my book, there was a period there, I hope I didn't interrupt you, but...
You know, you go to the HRC in Texas, where they have a 20th century archive, and you really can go through, I mean, there was a time there where they would buy people's, you know, cocktail napkins and things, writers, and Boston University has a lot of literary stuff.
I guess what I'm going to do is there will not be a Tobias Wolfe archive, so far as you know, with all the variant drafts and the scribblings and the outlines and the false starts.
Noblemouth, they...
This stuff is lost in action, right?
It is, yeah.
This has been deep-sexed.
This has been deep-sexed, exactly.
Are you protecting yourself by doing this, or you just don't want to burden the reader with it?
Oh, no, no.
It's just... I have a... Your own quality control mechanism.
It's my quality control mechanism, and it's also... I suppose to some extent it's my image control mechanism in that I would never want anyone to know
Are you concerned about that?
I'm concerned about... I'm afraid that people who saw how hard it is for me to get going on something would think I was crazy to be a writer.
It's really a problem for me to arrive at the finish.
Let me back up.
Scratch that.
It's not a problem.
It's just difficult.
It's very difficult.
And it's not necessarily a process that I feel like sharing with anybody.
It isn't important.
What's important is the result that I am struggling toward, not the struggle itself.
It seems kind of paradoxical to me.
I mean, I understand the use of scholarship and all that.
But one of the things that I do as a writer is try to make
try to make the production scene, the performance, seem effortless, the way, you know.
It's not supposed to look hard.
If it looks that hard, you haven't done it right.
And so, having spent months, in a sense, producing something that looks as easy as breathing, feels natural, just, you know, effortless,
I just guess I don't quite see the point in then showing everybody how hard it is.
I mean, it's of interest to scholars, I suppose, but it is not of any interest to me that anyone should know that.
I mean, I've gone to all these pains to conceal the effort.
Why then expose it?
I talked to Roger Kennedy just by paraphernalia.
I don't know who he is.
He used to learn.
Pardon me.
He used to learn the Smithsonian...
He's written a number of things, but they're talking about why so many people have, one of the criticisms against the University of Texas is that they require a lot of junk.
Yeah.
You know, what uses it?
And he said, he said, you know, sometimes the junk to the scholar is just as important as the masterpiece.
Well, sure.
And this, I'm just throwing this.
Sure, I'm sure that's true.
To see what got the person to, you know, wouldn't we love to see Shakespeare's notes?
the wellsprings of creativity, the creative process working.
Wouldn't we have loved to see that?
So, I mean, there is some argument to be, and that's not a question, I just know that.
Oh, no, no, I understand the argument exactly, but it's an argument for other people, not for me.
Okay, and I respect that.
Now, you did mention earlier that when you write, you are writing for a person who you hope will have similar tastes and interests as yourself.
Are you also writing
might we say, did you, in your mind, write for a reader a hundred years ago?
No, I don't think about that too much to tell you the truth.
Well, I think you do, though, because you said you're concerned about image, not image per se, but the product.
You know, I'm more thinking about whoever might read it now.
I mean, does it disturb you that you're not in Harold Bloom's Western canon, for instance?
Right, no.
No, it doesn't love to be, but I didn't think about it before you just mentioned it.
That was mentioned, by the way, that Tobias Volk was not in there, in the New York Magazine.
Oh, really?
Stegner, I guess, again, Sybil, I didn't see him, but Sybil and Steinberg and P.W.
mentioned it.
Oh, I didn't even... She didn't ask me to ask you that.
In fact, she asked me to ask Bloom that.
I'm not doing Bloom for her.
I am talking to her.
Well, I think he likes a different kind of writer than the kind of writer I am.
He's a little too crusty in this piece.
He's just thinking, I'm reading the book.
What's it called?
The Western Canon.
Is it an anthology?
No, it's literary criticism, actually.
It's the Western Canon literature.
Of course, I can see why a lot of people wouldn't be in there.
He really only takes 26 works, you know.
He has appendices in the back.
Is it interesting?
Yeah.
In fact, if I find the New York Magazine piece, it does mention me.
Well, we'll send it to you if you have a fax or something.
Sure.
You have a fax.
It's the same number that you... Oh, that's nice.
It's a combination fax.
Let's see.
Where were we?
Oh, yeah.
Posterior.
We don't have to... You only like it.
I'm really getting pretty close to, unless there's anything you think that I've... Nope.
I mean, two-hour interviews, for me, is terrific.
That's a lot of stuff.
I guess, going back, had you written The Duke of Deception, what would be in there?
That's not in there.
Oh, I couldn't begin.
I didn't write it.
I couldn't begin there.
Well, I mean, you didn't write it yet, but you certainly could have written...
that man's life, I think, uh, maybe as well as my brother did, really.
I couldn't have written that book.
I couldn't have written that, didn't you?
And, uh, you know, he couldn't have written mine.
We just had, as you said earlier, completely different lives.
Mm-hmm.
And you mentioned how you always looked up to Jeffrey and that he had lived an Italian different life.
Is there ever a life that, I mean, you don't, you, you have no regrets, I guess.
Oh, no.
No, I don't.
You wouldn't trade?
Mm-mm.
that life.
No, not for anything.
That's great.
And do you read each other's stuff?
Oh yeah, definitely.
We always exchange manuscripts.
When the manuscripts are in the final stages, just before they're going off to the publisher, we always send them to each other for a good shakedown.
And
know we're both pretty tough we do a lot of line by line editing we you know a process like that is without value unless it's fairly ruthless and so we are quite ruthless with each other and letting each other know what our problems are with a manuscript and where we think it could be stronger and also letting each other know what what we've done right you know and I think
possibly one of the most important questions that I haven't asked, or if I did ask, if I don't remember, and I think we were going to get to it, writing about the Vietnam experience.
You said that, what exactly prompted you to write about it?
I mean, was it because of the central event in your life?
Yeah, it was.
It was.
And I have found myself circling the experience in different ways in my writing life.
I've written short stories that
I've never actually written a short story.
I've written only one short story actually set there.
And it's totally fictional.
I mean, it has elements of moral autobiography in it, but the events themselves are invented.
And I was trying to catch something.
some internal truth.
But I, uh... Well, what was that piece?
Do you remember the name of it?
Yeah, it's called Memorial, and it was published in Granta last year.
Oh, recently.
Uh... Characters are completely different from me and my friends.
I mean, you know, but guys, guys, people like, you know, familiar characters to me.
Guys I knew in the Army were like that.
And, uh...
Unlike Tim O'Brien, who seems to have so many demons to exercise in that experience, he writes you basically about nothing else.
You don't have any similar demons, I would assume.
No, I don't think so.
I mean, there are demons who I wouldn't have written in the book, but I don't think they're as hard on me as Tim's are on him.
And partly that's because I think Tim just had a harder time of it over there than I did.
I mean, I think that's really what it comes down to.
I mean, he really had a very rough time with it over there.
I should send you the interview.
Yeah, I'd love to read it.
And the one that they're not using, because it's at least 50% longer where he talks about this, but I mean, that imagery of Pinkville, you know, of course it was just because of these pink areas on the map were shaded pink, and they were built up.
But I mean, he said it was pink, and he actually feels that there's a time with evil
oozes through the clouds, and you can feel it, and you can taste it, and you can smell it, and, you know, because he was through Milai six or seven or eight months after that, which is the core incident of this novel.
And this guy is, this guy is haunted by this, whatever happened, whatever the hell happened over there, I mean, it's, and you can see, and it drives this character to madness.
It looks like King Lear going off into the, you know,
on the motorboat at the end.
He says he's not going to write anymore, huh?
It's unbelievable.
And I challenged him on it.
You can imagine your wife and your wife's name, children, and my husband.
Catherine.
My wife's name is Catherine.
It's in here, yeah.
She's a...
She's a therapist.
Okay.
Ah, a therapist, a therapist, a pandemic therapist.
And you're in Syracuse?
Yeah.
And we have three children.
We have two boys.
Michael is 15.
Patrick is 14.
We have a little girl, Mary Elizabeth, who's four and a half.
Well, this will come out, what, in October?
October.
She's five.
Okay.
But I never see him in my last bag.
That's my oldest son.
Or my youngest son.
Not for you.
He's a karate.
Is any of this stuff you wear?
Yeah, that stuff's mine.
Because you look like you've stayed in pretty good shape.
You know, writing is so sedentary.
I have to do something.
Yeah, I knock off for half an hour when I'm at work and, you know, do some Nordic track or
knock off another half hour later on and lift some weights just to tone up a little.
Then I'd go for a walk later on.
I usually swim every day, too.
I'd go crazy otherwise.
How much do you swim?
I swim over a mile a day, usually.
I mean, everyone was pretty spare.
I have to say, this is a writer's room.
They don't see a lot of books and a lot of mementos.
I mean, you have the poster from the movie up there.
But I guess when you fuck through, it's all business, right?
Yeah.
That's why I'm not near the window.
I can't be near a window when I'm writing.
You should see John Irving's office.
It's, it's, I mean, first of all, the house.
Where does he live now?
Up in Vermont.
He's still in Vermont.
But he's got this place literally on the side of a mountain.
The upstairs on the second floor of the house, where are you?
Third floor.
A modest suburban, or I guess it's not suburban, or the city.
No, it's a city house.
It's a city house.
But the desk really...
is against the wall, and you kind of have a... The eaves there.
One of the eaves coming in, and the closest window is to your back, and that's... That's for light.
And I don't go... You do have a window overhead, I guess.
Skylight.
And, I mean, so I get... I'm too easily distracted.
I can't be near a window when I'm writing.
How about noise?
I mean, you've got a four-year-old kid.
This place is soundproof.
Have you heard anything?
Not a thing.
You haven't heard a thing.
You're making lots of noise down there.
You can be sure of that.
I've got all three kids at home right now.
Really?
Yeah.
And if there's noise, it will bother you.
There's a lot of it.
I can hear the words.
Generalized, distant noise doesn't bother me.
Kind of white noise.
But things are very quiet here, especially in the winter.
Obviously, I have to have the windows open now because the weather's warm.
Coffee, kids outside, that kind of thing doesn't bother me much.
But in the winter when it's all buttoned up up here, you can't hear a thing.
Neutic track, what's that thing over there?
Oh, it's some sort of a universal light machine.
Do you use that?
Yeah, I use it.
I just hate to have to think of what this stuff is.
We have a few books here to read.
Okay.
Just tell me the cover art for the book.
Yeah, the cover art for the book was based on a photograph I took over there of the, from a helicopter, a shot of the town that I was stationed in that was later largely, a lot of it was destroyed during Tet.
And the cover artist, the person who did it, then treated that photograph with tremendous impact.
I think brilliance and altered it to suggest the ominous future that hung over that town.
There's a sense of danger in the air and even of, you know, you feel the destruction hanging over it.
I think it's got an almost surreal quality to it, very powerful.
Was this something you proposed, or was this something they asked about?
No, we were fooling around with different covers, and then they said, well, you know, do you have anything?
And I sent them down all the pictures I had, which were not very many.
I had taken several, but most of them were lost over the years, and I sent down what I had.
So it was really there.
I mean, by itself, the picture is, I think, rather non-script.
It wouldn't have been one I would have thought necessarily, but it's just what he did with it that makes it so special.
Yeah, an art director.
He's really, really... Archie Ferguson.
This Boy's Life, was that with Hogan?
Or was that with... That was with Atlantic Monthly Press.
Sorry, that was with Atlantic Monthly Press, which is basically... They did a beautiful cover, too.
I love that cover on that.
No, that was art.
That was a painting, I think.
Yep, that's right.
Yeah, that's a great with the car going in the road.
I was looking for the darn thing last night to go over it.
And I have it in my section.
I'm sure I couldn't find it.
I've never watched a book.